---
uid: OtpOverview
summary: *content
---

<!-- Copyright 2021 Yubico AB

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License. -->

# OTP overview

## What is an OTP?

An OTP (one time password) is a character string generated by the YubiKey that can be used to authenticate a user during a login attempt. OTPs can be used in single-factor authentication or as the second factor in two-factor authentication (most common). In the case of two-factor authentication, users will enter their username and password prior to generating and submitting an OTP from their YubiKey.

If you have a YubiKey and would like to demo the two-factor OTP authentication experience, check out the [Yubico Playground](https://demo.yubico.com/).

## OTP Authentication Process

OTPs use symmetric-key cryptography to authenticate users against a central validation server.

During YubiKey production, a symmetric encryption key is generated and loaded onto the YubiKey. After generating the encryption key, it must be shared with the validation server in order to enable authentication.

Once a user adds a YubiKey to an account, OTP authentication works as follows:

1. For two-factor authentication, a user enters their username and password on the login screen of an application.

1. The user is prompted to insert their YubiKey into their device. Once inserted, the green LED of the YubiKey will begin to flash.

1. The user touches the YubiKey to generate and submit an OTP.

1. The OTP is sent to and verified by the validation server.

1. The validation server sends a response to the application that the OTP is valid.

1. The application uses the public identity of the OTP to verify that the YubiKey belongs to the user. If successful, the user is authenticated and logged in to the application.

## Validation Server

Yubico provides a validation server called [YubiCloud](https://www.yubico.com/products/yubicloud/). Encryption keys from all YubiKeys are automatically uploaded to YubiCloud during production, which enables OTP authentication out of the box.

## YubiKey OTP Configuration

Each YubiKey has two OTP slots, and each slot may be programmed with one of the following configurations:

- Yubico OTP
- Initiative for Open Authentication HMAC-based one-time password (OATH HOTP)
- Static password
- Challenge-response
- Near-Field Communication Data Exchange Format (NDEF)

The slots are activated by touching the YubiKey during authentication. However, only one slot may be used at a time. Which slot is used is determined by the duration of touch. The first slot, or “short press” slot, is activated when the YubiKey is touched for 1 - 2.5 seconds. The second slot, or “long press” slot, is activated when the YubiKey is touched for 3 - 5 seconds.

No data is shared between OTP slots, and each slot may be protected with an access code to prevent modification. Off-the-shelf YubiKeys come with the first slot configured with a Yubico OTP (registered with the YubiCloud) and the second slot empty.

## Desktop SDK Functionality

The SDK is designed to enable developers to accomplish common YubiKey OTP configuration tasks:

- Program a Yubico OTP credential
- Program a slot with a static password
- Program a challenge-response credential
- Calculate a challenge-response credential
- Delete a slot’s configuration
- Program an HMAC-SHA1 OATH-HOTP credential
- Display an OTP slot’s status
- Configure a slot for NDEF
- Update slot settings
- Swap slot configurations
