---
uid: UsersManualPivAttestation
---

<!-- Copyright 2021 Yubico AB

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License. -->

# PIV attestation statements

Attestation was added as a feature in version 4.3 of the YubiKey, so will not be available
on earlier models.

It is possible to create an attestation statement for some of the keys generated on a
YubiKey. Such a statement simply offers evidence that a private key was generated on a
YubiKey. It does not say anything about who owns the YubiKey, or who signed some data
using the private key, only that the key is from a YubiKey.

> [!NOTE]
> In version 1.0.0 of the SDK, it was not possible to create an attestation statement for
> keys in slots 82 - 95 (retired key slots). Beginning with version 1.0.1 of the SDK it is
> possible to create an attestation statement for the keys in those slots.

This attestation statement is provided in the form of an X.509 certificate. What this
certificate attests (or asserts, affirms) is that "the private key partner to the public
key in this certificate was generated on a YubiKey."

Note that any private key generated on the YubiKey, using the PIV application, is not
allowed to leave the device. In addition, the YubiKey will not create an attestation
statement for an imported key. Hence, it is possible to verify that a private key
operation was performed (or will be performed) by the YubiKey and only the YubiKey.

If the YubiKey is version 5.0 or later, then the attestation statement also contains the
YubiKey's serial number. That means anyone examining the certificate can be confident that
not only was the private key generated by a YubiKey, but a specific YubiKey.

## Uses

Generally, a certificate binds a name with a public key. That allows verifiers to tie
private key operations to a specific entity. For example, if a public key verifies a
digital signature, and that public key is certified by a certificate (and the certificate
verifies, see chaining below), then the signature is said to belong to the name on the
certificate.

However, an attestation statement does not tie a name to public key, it ties a process to
a public key. The cert has a name, such as "YubiKey PIV Attestation 9A", but that is the
name on all attestation statements of all YubiKeys, when the slot attested is 9A. It is
not the name of the owner of the public key, but rather the name associated with the
process used to generate the public key.

How is that useful? Some applications want correspondents to create signatures for
authentication or authorization purposes. But they want to know whether the private key
used to sign is a software key or a hardware key. A hardware key is much more secure, and
with an attestation statement, the application can have more confidence that the key has
not been stolen because someone used a weak password or left a monitor unattended.

Hardware keys are not completely secure, after all someone can steal your YubiKey. But it
is much harder to mount a remote attack on someone using a YubiKey. The attacker must have
access to the physical device. And if the attacker does indeed steal your YubiKey, they
must enter your PIN to create a signature (assuming you did not turn off the PIN
requirement for signing). Because the PIN and PUK block after too many wrong values are
entered, it is likely a brute force attack will fail.

## Chaining

Someone verifying your attestation statement will need to know that the certificate you
provide is indeed valid. To verify that cert, verify its contents and signature. The public
key used to verify a cert's signature comes from the certificate issuer, also known as the
Certificate Authority (CA). You will find that public key in the CA's cert. To verify that
you do indeed have the correct CA cert, verify using its issuer's public key, found in the
CA's issuer's certificate. And so on.

This process ends at a root cert. This is a certificate you obtain outside the normal
certificate distribution system. Your application will likely have some sort of cert store
with trusted root certs. These trusted certs are those that you obtained in a trusted
manner, and believe them to be valid. Most trusted certs are "baked into" software
distributions. For example, web browsers come with various root certs already loaded. If
you trust the software and its distribution, you trust those root certs. Most software
packages that use root certs allow you to add new roots.

The process of verifying a certificate by using the cert of the issuer, and verifying the
issuer's cert by using the cert of the issuer's issuer, and so on until reaching a root
cert, is known as chaining.

```txt
                        Root Cert
                            |
                            |
                        [CA Cert]
            (There may or may not be a CA cert
           between the Root and Attestation Cert)
                            |
                            |
                     Attestation Cert
                        (Slot F9)
       (from PivSession.GetAttestationCertificate)
                            |
                            |
                  Attestation Statement
  (created using PivSession.CreateAttestationStatement)
                         (a cert)
```

To obtain the YubiKey CA and root certs, visit the
[Yubico Developer's PIV Attestation website](https://developers.yubico.com/PIV/Introduction/PIV_attestation.html).
Using the appropriate cert from this location, you can verify an attestation statement
built by a YubiKey.

## Terminology

Start with the private key in an attestable slot (9A, 9C, 9D, 9E, and 82 - 95). This key
has a partner public key.

On every YubiKey (since version 4.3) is an attestation key and certificate. These are in
slot F9.

When an attestation statement is built, the private key in the attestable slot is the
"attested key". A new certificate is created. This new certificate is called the
attestation statement.

* Slot 9A, 9C, 9D, 9E, 82 - 95:
  * public and private key pair
  * private key is the attested key
  * attestation statement:
    * an X.509 certificate
    * subject key is the public key partner to the attested key
    * signed by the attestation key
    * chains to the attestation cert
* Slot F9:
  * public and private key pair
  * private key is the attestation key
  * attestation certificate:
    * an X.509 certificate
    * subject key is the public key partner to private key in F9
    * chains to a root

## Replacing the attestation key and cert

It is possible to replace the attestation key and cert that is loaded onto the YubiKey at
manufacture. However, this is something very few users will want to do. If you are
wondering whether you might like to replace the attestation key and cert, it is almost a
certainty that you should not. But there are companies who have wanted the attestation
statement to chain up to their own root instead of a one from Yubico. Hence, the YubiKey
allows for it.

Note that if you replace the Yubico key and cert, there is no way to recover these
original values, they will be gone for good. So use this method with caution.

The replacement key must be either RSA-2048, ECC-P256, or ECC-P384, and there are some
restrictions on the certificate. YubiKeys before version 5 did allow 1024-bit RSA keys as
attestation keys, but to make your application work for all YubiKeys, you should never use
a 1024-bit RSA key as an attestation key.

There are two ways to replace the key: generate a new attestation key or import a key.

First, you will almost certainly NOT want to generate the attestation key. If you generate
a new key, you will get a public key at the time the key is generated and will have to
build a certificate for that public key, then import the certificate. That attestation key
will only work for the YubiKey on which it was generated.

Generally, the same attestation key and cert is loaded onto many YubiKeys. It is much more
efficient to get one attestation certificate for thousands of YubiKeys than to get
thousands of attestation certificates.

If you have a private key and certificate outside the YubiKey, you can import both.
However, note that the attestation certificate must be built with these restrictions:

* It must be X.509 version 2 or 3
* The encoded validity dates must be less than 66 bytes
* The encoded `SubjectName` must be less than 1029 bytes
* The total length of the certificate must be fewer than 3052 bytes

The first restriction -- the certificate cannot be version 1 -- might be the most
troublesome. Very few CAs build version 1 certificates these days, so is is likely there
will be no issue.

However, there is one thing to think about. It is possible the certificate building
software the CA uses might build version 1 certificates by default. For example, the
OpenSSL command line tool can build certificates. However, it does not allow you to pick
the version number. It will build a version 1 certificate unless the cert to build will
contain one or more extensions.

That is, if the certificate to build will contain no extensions, the OpenSSL software will
produce a version 1 certificate. If the cert will contain at least one extension, the
OpenSSL software will create a version 3 cert. The OpenSSL command line tool currently
does not support building version 2 certificates.

Hence, to make sure you build a version 3 certificate using the OpenSSL command line tool,
build it with at least one extension. For example, here is a command that builds a
certificate from a cert request and the cert it builds will contain the `BasicConstraints`
extension.

```
 $ openssl x509 -req -in certRequest.pem -days 3640 -CA rootcert.pem -CAkey rootkey.pem
  -extfile basic.txt -CAserial rootcert.srl -out cert.pem

 where basic.txt contains the BasicConstraints extension:

 (the following are the contents of the file basic.txt)

 basicConstraints=critical,CA:true,pathlen:1
```

For the second restriction, if the certificate is a valid X.509 version 3 certificate, the
validity dates will be less than 64 bytes, so that should not be a problem.

For the third, most names in certificates are less than 128 bytes, so specifying the name
for your attestation cert to be less than 1029 bytes should be easy. Nonetheless, keep an
eye on the length of the name. Note that the encoded `SubjectName` refers to the DER
encoding of

```
SEQUENCE OF RelativeDistinguishedName
```

If you look inside the DER encoding of a certificate, you will find a `SubjectName`. If
you pull out that name as an individual entity, it will look something like this.

```
      30 68
         31 0b
            30 09 06 03 55 04 06 13 02 55 53
         31 0b
            30 09 06 03 55 04 08 0c 02 43 41
         31 12
            30 10 06 03 55 04 07 0c 09 50 61 6c 6f 20 41 6c
            74 6f
         31 19
            30 17 06 03 55 04 0a 0c 10 46 61 6b 65 20 41 74
            74 65 73 74 61 74 69 6f 6e
         31 1d
            30 1b 06 03 55 04 03 0c 14 46 61 6b 65 20 41 74
            74 65 73 74 61 74 69 6f 6e 20 32 35 36
```

This is a TLV (tag-length-value) with a tag of `30`, a length of `68` (decimal 104) and a
value of `31 0b ... 36`.

The length in the TLV is the value's length. The total length is `6a` (decimal 106): the
length of the value plus the length of the tag (one) plus the length of the length octets
(also one).

For a `SubjectName` to be invalid for an attestation cert, it would look something like
this.

```
      30 82 04 01
         31 0b 30 09 06 03 55 04 06 13 02 55 53 31 0b 30
            . . .
         65 20 41 74 74 65 73 74 61 74 69 6f 6e 20 32 35
         36
```

In this case, the tag is `30`, the length is `04 01` (decimal 1025) (the 82 indicates that
the following two bytes make up the length), and there are 1025 bytes that make up the
value. The total length of this `SubjectName` is `0405` (decimal 1029): the value's length
plus the length of the tag (one) plus the length of the length octets (three).

### Checking the key and cert.

Due to space and compute limitations, the YubiKey itself does not verify the inputs before
loading them. That means it is possible to load bad key/cert combinations. For example, it
is possible to load a cert that contains a subject key that is not the partner to the
private key. In that case, the YubiKey will create attestation statements that do not
verify or do not chain to a root. In other cases, the YubiKey might simply return an error
when requested to build an attestation statement. Hence, you must be certain the key and
cert you load are correct, and you should thoroughly test the attestation statements
before deployment.

There is a method in the `PivSession` class to replace the attestation key and cert.

```csharp
public void ReplaceAttestationKeyAndCertificate(PivPrivateKey privateKey, X509Certificate2 certificate)
```

If you use this method to replace the key and cert, it will check the certificate to make
sure it meets the requirement. If not, the method will throw an exception.

However, this method will not verify the cert itself, nor will it verify the validity
dates. It will also NOT verify that the public key represented in the cert is indeed the
partner to the private key specified. If you want to make sure they match, you will need
to write your own code.

The following code is one way to make this check. It uses standard C# classes. If you have
access to a secure multi-precision arithmetic library (often called `BigNum` or
`BigInteger`), there is a more efficient technique. However, the standard C# `BigInteger`
class is not one you should use with sensitive data, so we present this technique.

```csharp

using System.Security.Cryptography;
using System.Security.Cryptography.X509Certificates;

private static bool IsMatchingKeyAndCert(PivPrivateKey privateKey, X509Certificate2 certificate)
{
    if (privateKey.Algorithm == PivAlgorithm.Rsa2048)
    {
        return IsMatchingKeyAndCertRsa((PivRsaPrivateKey)privateKey, (RSA)certificate.PublicKey.Key);
    }

    return IsMatchingKeyAndCertEcc((PivEccPrivateKey)privateKey, (byte[])certificate.PublicKey.EncodedKeyValue);
}

private static bool IsMatchingKeyAndCertRsa(PivRsaPrivateKey privateKey, RSA publicKey)
{
    bool returnValue = isValidCert;

    // In order to build a System.Security.Cryptography.RSA object
    // that contains the private key, we must provide all possible
    // components: modulus, public exponent, private exponent, CRT
    // info.
    // We have everything needed from the publicKey (an RSA object)
    // and privateKey (a PivRsaPrivateKey object) except for the
    // private exponent. If you have the CRT info, you don't need the
    // private exponent, so the PivRsaPrivateKey class doesn't keep
    // it (and the YubiKey itself does not keep it).
    // But in order to build the RSA private key-containing object we
    // need to obtain the private exponent. Except we don't really.
    // Although the object will not build itself without that
    // component, once it's built, the object ignores it. So we can
    // supply anything as the private exponent, the object will
    // build, and it will operate correctly anyway. That's why we're
    // using an arbitrary private exponent.

    RSAParameters publicParams = publicKey.ExportParameters(false);
    byte[] fakeExponent = new byte[publicParams.Modulus.Length];
    byte[] modCopy = new byte[publicParams.Modulus.Length];
    byte[] expCopy = new byte[publicParams.Exponent.Length];

    Array.Copy(publicParams.Modulus, modCopy, publicParams.Modulus.Length);
    Array.Copy(publicParams.Exponent, expCopy, publicParams.Exponent.Length);

    // To determine if the public key in the cert is the partner to
    // the private key, encrypt arbitrary data using that public key,
    // then decrypt it using the private key. If that works, they are
    // partners. Use PKCS 1 padding so we don't have to involve any
    // digest algorithms.
    byte[] dataToEncrypt = new byte[16];

    using RandomNumberGenerator randomObject = RandomNumberGenerator.Create();
    randomObject.GetBytes(fakeExponent);
    fakeExponent[0] &= 0x7F;
    fakeExponent[^1] |= 1;
    randomObject.GetBytes(dataToEncrypt);

    var rsaParams = new RSAParameters();

    try
    {
        rsaParams.D = fakeExponent;
        rsaParams.DP = privateKey.ExponentP.ToArray();
        rsaParams.DQ = privateKey.ExponentQ.ToArray();
        rsaParams.InverseQ = privateKey.Coefficient.ToArray();
        rsaParams.P = privateKey.PrimeP.ToArray();
        rsaParams.Q = privateKey.PrimeQ.ToArray();
        rsaParams.Modulus = modCopy;
        rsaParams.Exponent = expCopy;

        using var rsaObject = RSA.Create();
        rsaObject.ImportParameters(rsaParams);

        byte[] encryptedData = rsaObject.Encrypt(dataToEncrypt, RSAEncryptionPadding.Pkcs1);
        byte[] decryptedData = rsaObject.Decrypt(encryptedData, RSAEncryptionPadding.Pkcs1);

        return MemoryExtensions.SequenceEqual<byte>(dataToEncrypt, decryptedData);
    }
    finally
    {
        CryptographicOperations.ZeroMemory(rsaParams.P);
        CryptographicOperations.ZeroMemory(rsaParams.Q);
        CryptographicOperations.ZeroMemory(rsaParams.DP);
        CryptographicOperations.ZeroMemory(rsaParams.DQ);
        CryptographicOperations.ZeroMemory(rsaParams.InverseQ);
        CryptographicOperations.ZeroMemory(rsaParams.D);
    }
}

private static bool IsMatchingKeyAndCertEcc(PivEccPrivateKey privateKey, byte[] publicKey)
{
    bool returnValue = false;

    ECCurve eccCurve = privateKey.Algorithm == PivAlgorithm.EccP256 ?
        ECCurve.CreateFromValue("1.2.840.10045.3.1.7") :
        ECCurve.CreateFromValue("1.3.132.0.34");

    var eccParams = new ECParameters
    {
        Curve = (ECCurve)eccCurve
    };

    try
    {
        int coordLength = (publicKey.Length - 1) / 2;
        byte[] xCoord = new byte[coordLength];
        byte[] yCoord = new byte[coordLength];
        Array.Copy(publicKey, 1, xCoord, 0, coordLength);
        Array.Copy(publicKey, 1 + coordLength, yCoord, 0, coordLength);
        eccParams.Q.X = xCoord;
        eccParams.Q.Y = yCoord;
        eccParams.D = privateKey.PrivateValue.ToArray();

        // To determine if the public key in the cert is the partner
        // to the private key, sign random data using that private
        // key, then verify it using the public key. If that works,
        // they are partners. Use the SignHash method so we don't
        // have to involve any digest algorithms.
        using var eccObject = ECDsa.Create(eccParams);

        byte[] dataToSign = new byte[coordLength];
        using RandomNumberGenerator randomObject = RandomNumberGenerator.Create();
        randomObject.GetBytes(dataToSign);

        byte[] signature = eccObject.SignHash(dataToSign);
        return eccObject.VerifyHash(dataToSign, signature);
    }
    finally
    {
        CryptographicOperations.ZeroMemory(eccParams.D);
    }
}
```
