---
uid: YubiKeyTransportOverview
summary: *content
---

<!-- Copyright 2021 Yubico AB

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License. -->

# Physical interfaces

Physical interfaces are the ways that a computer, phone, or other device can connect
with the YubiKey in order to communicate with it.


## USB Transports

All of the models in the YubiKey 5 Series provide a USB 2.0 interface, regardless of
the form factor of the USB connector. The YubiKey is a composite USB device. When plugged
into a computer with its default settings, the YubiKey will present three separate USB
transports:

- A Human Interface Device (HID) Keyboard
- A HID FIDO device
- A smart card reader with smart card attached

Each device serves one or more applications on the YubiKey, with the smart card interface
being the most versatile. Below is a list of applications available on the YubiKey 5 and
which USB transport they are available on:

| Application | HID Keyboard | Smart Card   | HID FIDO    | 
| :---------- | :----------: | :----------: | :---------: |
| Management  | Partial [1]  | Yes          | Partial [1] |
| OTP         | Yes          | Partial [2]  | No          |
| OATH        | No           | Yes          | No          |
| PIV         | No           | Yes          | No          |
| OpenPGP     | No           | Yes          | No          |
| FIDO U2F    | No           | No [3]       | Yes         |
| FIDO2       | No           | No           | Yes         |

[1]: The GetDeviceInfo and SetDeviceInfo commands are available over all transports.

[2]: OTP was available over Smart Card in the YubiKey NEO. Most OTP operations are now
blocked over smart card.

[3]: The FIDO U2F was available over smart card in the YubiKey NEO.

The USB product ID (PID) and product string will change depending on which of the USB
interfaces are enabled as described in the table below. Yubico's vendor ID (VID)
is `0x1050`.

| USB interfaces      | PID     | Product string        |
| :-----------------: | :-----: | :-------------------: |
| OTP                 | 0x0401  | YubiKey OTP           |
| FIDO                | 0x0402  | YubiKey FIDO          |
| CCID                | 0x0404  | YubiKey CCID          |
| OTP, FIDO           | 0x0403  | YubiKey OTP+FIDO      |
| OTP, CCID           | 0x0405  | YubiKey OTP+CCID      |
| FIDO, CCID          | 0x0406  | YubiKey FIDO+CCID     |
| OTP, FIDO, CCID     | 0x0407  | YubiKey OTP+FIDO+CCID |

An interface is enabled so long as there is a single application enabled which uses that
interface. For example, the OTP (HID Keyboard) is enabled when the OTP application is enabled
over USB. The HID FIDO interface is enabled when either the U2F or FIDO2 applications are
enabled over USB. The CCID (smart card) interface is enabled when the PIV, OATH, or OpenPGP
applications are enabled over USB.

## NFC

In addition to USB, the YubiKey 5 NFC keys also provide an NFC wireless interface for
additional convenience. Unlike the YubiKey NEO, the YubiKey 5 NFC does not support RFID
tags, such as MIFARE Classic and MIFARE DESFire.

The URI used by the NDEF tag has been updated to a new format; an example of the new format
is provided below. The `<OTP>` value will be replaced with the OTP generated by the YubiKey.

```txt
https://my.yubico.com/yk/#<OTP>
```

For operations that require a touch, all touch requests within the first 15 seconds of the
operation will succeed. After a period of inactivity, a YubiKey placed on a desktop NFC reader
may power down to help prevent unintended access to the device. To regain connectivity with
an NFC reader, remove the YubiKey from the reader and reposition it on the reader. Some NFC
readers may power cycle the YubiKey and, in doing so, prevent the device from powering down.

## See also

- [Transport: HID Keyboard (OTP)](xref:YubiKeyTransportHIDKeyboard)
- [Transport: Smart Card (CCID)](xref:YubiKeyTransportSmartCard)
- [Transport: HID FIDO](xref:YubiKeyTransportHIDFIDO)
